BBI JU ANNOUNCES A FURTHER € 135 MILLION OF FUNDING TO BOOST THE DEVELOPMENT OF EU’S BIO-BASED INDUSTRIES SECTOR
04 April 2019
Today BBI JU officially launched its 2019 Call for Proposals, supporting a variety of topics ranging from resolving end-of-life issues for plastics to producing valuable food and feed compounds from microalgae.
With a total budget of € 135 million, the 2019 Call is the sixth in a total of seven for the period between 2017 and 2020 and is built around 4 strategic orientations: Feedstock, Process, Products, and Market uptake. It continues to be based on the acceleration of the development of new sustainable value chains from biomass feedstock supply via efficient processing, to the acceptance and application of bio-based products in the end-markets.
A total of 21 topics are included in the 2019 Call with 10 Research and Innovation Action (RIA) topics, 4 Coordination and Support Actions (CSA) and 7 Innovation Actions (4 DEMOs and 3 Flagships). Similar to previous Calls, the one of 2019 also respects the Horizon 2020 principles of openness, transparency and excellence.
On the occasion of the 2019 Call launch, Philippe Mengal, BBI JU Executive Director commented: ‘As we publish our sixth Call, I can proudly say that our portfolio is maturing and our projects are delivering concrete results. With this Call, we will continue to move in this direction, contributing to the structuring and mobilising effect of key stakeholders across sectors, regions and countries towards the creation of new value chains, while also delivering tangible socio-economic results. I invite you to apply for this opportunity and join our community of beneficiaries who are working together to build a bio-based sector that is putting Europe back on the map of attractive areas for investment in bio-based industries.’
The BBI JU is the largest and most ambitious initiative ever launched in the EU to develop competitive and sustainable bio-based industries. The ambition that drove its creation was to bring about the systemic change needed to develop a European bio-based industry allowing investments to remain in Europe. Thereby, BBI JU makes a strong impact in creating new jobs and clear value to all EU citizens.
The deadline for submission of proposals to the BBI JU 2019 Call is 4 September 2019, 17:00 CET. More information about the 2019 Call will be provided during the BBI JU Info Day on the 12 April in Brussels.
