Invitation to the BEREC public debriefing on the outcomes of the 40th Board of Regulators ordinary plenary meeting

02 October 2019
Share 
The results of the elections for BEREC Chair 2021 and number of public consultations will be among the topics to be presented at the BEREC public debriefing on the outcomes of the 40th BERC ordinary plenary meeting. The public debriefing will take place in Brussels on 10 October 2019 at 14:00 (CET).

BEREC Chair 2019 Jeremy Godfrey (ComReg, Ireland) invites all interested parties to attend the event in person or online via the live stream. The BEREC Chair will provide the latest information on the following topics:

Net neutrality/Open Internet;
BEREC Work Programme for 2020 and stakeholders engagement;
During the public debriefing, the BEREC Chair will also announce the launch of other six public consultations on the following documents:

Draft BEREC Work Programme 2020;
Draft BEREC feasibility study on development of coverage information for 5G deployments;
Update to the BEREC Guidelines on the Implementation of the Open Internet Regulation;
Draft BEREC Guidelines on common approaches to the identification of the network termination point in different network topologies;
Draft BEREC Guidelines to assist NRAs on the consistent application of geographical surveys of network deployments;
Draft BEREC Guidelines detailing QoS parameters of IAS and publicly available ICS and the publication of information.
Taking into account the comments received from the stakeholders, BEREC Chair will introduce with the new timeframe for submission of contributions for public consultations.

There will be an opportunity to ask questions, personally at the event or via Twitter by using - #BERECpublic.

Important: Due to security reasons, please register to the event in order to receive your entry pass to the European Commission’s premises: Room 3D, Albert Borschette Congress Center (CCAB), Rue Froissart 36, 1040 Brussels, Belgium, 14:00 (CEST) | Deadline 7 October, 2019.

The BEREC public debriefing will take place just a week before the annual BEREC Stakeholder Forum. One of the central topics of the panel discussions is cybersecurity in the context of 5G networks. The registration is still open. The event will take place on 16 October 2019 in Brussels, at Le Plaza Hotel.

Watch us live on BEREC’s website| Questions via Twitter #BERECpublic or email: press@berec.europa.eu | Recording of the event on BEREC’s YouTube channel afterwards.