EU Public Procurement training - watch the live stream on our website on 18 September

17 September 2019
Share 
On 18 September 2019 the Agency for Support for BEREC, the BEREC Office, at its premises in Riga, Latvia, will hold Training Session on EU Public Procurement for Economic Operators.

The session will be open to individuals and organizations willing to obtain additional knowledge about the EU public procurement process, the procurement opportunities at the BEREC Office and the potential for participation in procurement of other EU Agencies and EU institutions.  Please consult the BEREC Office Procurement plan for 2019.

Due to the high demand, there will be two identical training sessions:

Morning session 9:00 – 13:00 (Riga time);
Afternoon session 14:00 – 18:00 (Riga time).
The topics of the training session will include:

General insight on legal framework of the EU public procurement;
Procurement of the BEREC Office;
Comparison between Latvian and EU procurement;
Use of e-tendering for submission of tenders.
Please, see the agenda for the morning and the afternoon session.

Event is open to the public and is free of charge, but was subject to prior registration, as the number of seats are limited. Deadline for registration was 12 September 2019.

The training is organized by the BEREC Office in collaboration with the Latvian public authorities: Ministry of Economy, Ministry of Transport, Procurement Monitoring Bureau and with the support of European Commission.

BEREC Office is the only EU Agency in Latvia and it works in the area of telecommunications. Its main task is to provide superior professional and administrative support to the Body of European Regulators for Electronic Communications.

The event will be streamed on berec.europa.eu: live streaming will appear 10 min prior to the event on the first (landing) page. The live streaming audience can also interact with the speakers by sending their questions via Twitter #BERECOffice or email press@berec.europa.eu

Recording of the event will be available on BEREC’s YouTube channel afterwards and the BEREC website.