DG GROW becomes the Centre’s 68th client
The Translation Centre is pleased to announce that on 25 November 2019, it signed an arrangement with the European Commission’s Directorate-General for Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs (DG GROW).
DG GROW is the European Commission service responsible for completing the internal market for goods and services.
Among its missions is to foster entrepreneurship and growth by reducing the administrative burden on small businesses. DG GROW is therefore currently developing the single digital gateway, which aims to facilitate online access to the information, administrative procedures and assistance that citizens and businesses need to operate in another EU country.
The information to be translated will include procedures in the areas of travel, work, retirement, transportation, access to education and youth services, health services, starting a business and financial, environmental, employment and taxation rules.
As the information in the 28 EU Member States is usually only available in the national language(s), the Commission has undertaken to fund the translation of around 500 web pages per Member State, by signing an arrangement with the Translation Centre. The plan is for all Member States’ websites to be available in the national language(s) and also another language (currently English only but more might be added in the future). The project is scheduled to run over two years (2020/2021); beyond that, web pages may need to be updated periodically.
The Translation Centre is pleased to be able to offer its language services to its third European Commission Directorate-General. It has already been working for the Directorate-General for Employment, Social Affairs and Inclusion (DG EMPL) since 2003 on the EURES portal and this year on the European Skills/Competences, Qualifications and Occupations (ESCO) project, and with the Directorate-General for Justice and Consumers (DG JUST) since 2015 on the Online Dispute Resolution (ODR) platform.
