Cedefop VET opinion survey country reports available online

Image copyright: 
@Shutterstock/Brandon Bourdages
Does vocational education and training (VET) have a positive image in Slovakia or Spain? How likely are VET graduates to continue to higher education in Cyprus or Germany? Answers to these and many more questions are provided in Cedefop’s European public opinion survey on VET country reports.
The  have been prepared by Cedefop’s  network. They offer analysis and interpretation of the survey findings. The , which was published in 2017, covers the 28 Member States of the European Union. A total of more than 35 000 people aged 15 or older, from different social and demographic groups, gave their opinions in face-to-face interviews.
The survey provides an unprecedented insight into EU citizens’ views on awareness, attractiveness, experience and effectiveness of VET in the EU.
For example, 72% of Croats say that VET contributes to finding a job quickly; respondents with a VET background overwhelmingly (90%) agree that people in vocational education acquire skills needed by employers.
Over nine in 10 Austrians (92%) are satisfied with their level of work-related skills. In France, 64% of respondents believe that the government should give priority to investment in VET, rather than in general initial education. And 81% of those having received vocational education are pleased with the work-related skills they have developed, compared to only 54% in general education.
In Finland, eight in 10 respondents (compared to 57% of Europeans) were given information about VET at the time of making a decision about their education at upper secondary level. And 52% of Finns think it is easy to switch from VET to general education (with the EU average being 41%).
In Poland, 79% of respondents relate VET to continuous professional development in adult life. However, only 24% of adults aged 25-64 participated in some form of organised training in the 12 months before the survey, while the EU average was 40%.
Greek VET respondents are very satisfied with the quality of teaching (90%), but to a lesser extent with the available equipment (69%), compared to an 81% EU average.
Check out the  to find out what the public’s opinion of VET is in your country and make comparisons with other Member States.
These country reports are part of the series  and complement other general information on .
