Malta: VET learners contribute to society 

In addition to its commitment to excellence in vocational education and nurturing high performance standards and professionalism in its graduates, the is also dedicated to building socially responsible citizens.
In a globalised economy, which fosters an individualistic outlook on one’s choices promoting personal advantage and immediate materialistic gain, it is critical that (VET) learners gain a balanced view of the world and that they do not just secure a job but also develop their social awareness and contribute to social cohesion. All learners have an opportunity to carry out community work with non-governmental organisations, local councils, and other entities as part of their learning programme and have their relevant know-how accredited.
Young and adult learners need to be prepared for the continuous radically changing world of employment, and improve alongside their employability skills, their flexibility and adaptability, work ethic and project management skills, reliability and time management. They should also be given an opportunity to engage in a process that allows them to shape their own future, cultural and social lives in a way constructive for society as a whole. With this intent and in line with the institution’s core values,  launched its corporate social responsibility (CSR) programme on 13 February 2019 at the  Main Campus.   
The main aim of the CSR programme is to enable VET learners to engage in meaningful social relations and actively contribute to enhanced social wellbeing, fostering a responsible and active citizenship. Learners participating in the college’s CSR programme can improve their learning experience, profile and CV during the learning process through a diverse range of opportunities provided by  in collaboration with interested stakeholders. These opportunities are available in areas such as entrepreneurship, creative and performing arts, sport and culture. Each of these programmes includes an accredited unit dedicated to CSR.  In this respect all MCASTlearners in the areas above can assimilate CSR-specific knowledge and skills in non-formal and informal settings and have these skills recognised through accreditation.
 The implementation of the CSR initiative encourages and promotes personal development, having at the same time a positive impact on the community.
