#CedefopPhotoAward 2019 winners announced!

The winning teams of the  competition come from Austria, Croatia and Romania.
In total, 112 teams of vocational education and training (VET) learners from 20 European countries took part in the fourth edition of the #CedefopPhotoAward. The teams consisted of 380 VET learners and 76 teachers/trainers, representing 73 learning providers. The learners were asked to share a photostory of a memorable VET experience.
Two winning teams, from Austria (‘Cultureconnects’ team from the College of engineering, art and design and Institute for research and technology Graz-Ortweinschule) and Croatia (‘The Chefs’ team from the Economic and Tourism School of Daruvar), have been nominated for the top award to be presented by European Commissioner for Employment, Social Affairs, Skills and Labour Mobility Marianne Thyssen at the fourth  (#EUVocationalSkills) in Helsinki (14-18 October).
The top spot will be decided via an online public vote, organised by the European Commission during the European vocational skills week. Details of the vote will be published in due course.
The Prix du jury this year goes to the ‘Artisan in Maramureș’ team from the Marmația Technological High School in Romania. The team will travel to Thessaloniki for the opening of the  (#TIFF60) on 31 October.
The 20 winning and runner-up entries will be exhibited in Thessaloniki in the context of #TIFF60 and in Helsinki during the #EUVocationalSkills week.
Austria: Cultureconnects (‘cultureconnects’ team)
Anna Fachbach, Sarah Steinhäusler, Jacob Jabornig and Benjamin Wedemeyer bring together the experiences of four individuals from different environments and diverse vocational art schools in Germany, Austria, Poland and Italy. Their photostory depicts the power of VET to connect people no matter where they come from. They shared their Erasmus+ project INTERFACE experience where, during a one-week workshop, they had the opportunity to get to know one another and learn about different educational approaches in arts and design.  
Croatia: Skinny chef (‘The Chefs’ team)
Lara Ivesa, Martina Stari and Domink Zulj were inspired by the talent of young chef Matej who has been appreciated by various top-notch hotels and has already had numerous job offers. They show his love of food and especially of making desserts. On the night before the photoshoot he was up until 4am making birthday cakes! Matej is also looking forward to possibilities of further education and improvement.
Romania: My path, our path... (‘Artisan in Maramureș’ team)
Beatris Panas, Carina Czako, Patrick Liszkovics and Alin Pașca portray through their photostory how tradition and art can become a source of inspiration to start one’s own professional venture. The fascination for a grandmother’s embroidering of traditional shirts, the pride in wearing them and the impression they left on an encouraging teacher were the incentive behind the creation of the mini-company DALSI SRL. With the help of associates from different nationalities this mini-company promotes a strong connection between the locals and the traditional products of various cultures: Romanian, Hungarian, and Ukrainian.
The runners-up list is made up of the following teams:
‘Power Rooster’ team from Escola de Tecnologia e Gestão de Barcelos (Portugal)
‘Sunny Students’ team from the 5th Evening Vocational High School of Patra (Greece)
‘Asperger Connexion’ team from ENGIM Torino Artigianelli (Italy)
‘The Mermaid Team’ from the 2nd Vocational School Apprenticeship of Thessaloniki-OAED (Greece)
‘1/13 Band of Hawk’ team from SZCC - Vedres István Építőipari Szakgimnázium (Hungary)
‘Obiettivo Finlandia’ team from ENGIM Piemonte Artigianelli Torino (Italy)
‘The Haircare Givers’ team from  Atlantis College (Cyprus)
‘LAMB’ team from the Higher Medical School and Secondary Medical School (Czech Republic)
‘Expression’ team from the Malta College of Arts, Science and Technology Institute of the Creative Arts (Malta)
‘Bauh(e)art’ team from the 5th Evening Vocational High School of Patra (Greece)
‘Stick Figure’ team from Berufskolleg Senne (Germany)
‘Food lovers’ team from Zespol Szkol Ekonomiczno-Gastronomicznych (Poland)
‘Power of colours’ team from Zespół Szkół Chemicznych w Bydgoszczy (Poland)
‘Umprumcard’ team from  Střední uměleckoprůmyslová škola (Czech Republic)
‘Dual Mechanics’ team from Electromechanic - Aurel Vlaicu High School / Dual School Bosch (Romania)
‘JFT’ team from Szolnoki Műszaki Szakképzési Centrum Jendrassik György Gépipari Szakgimnáziuma (Hungary)
‘CaracterizaciónRYC’ team from I.E.S. Ramón y Cajal, Valladolid (Spain)
Check out the winning stories' .
