Luxembourg: updated labour code and law on reforming vocational training 

On June 19, 2019, the Chamber of Deputies voted to amend the labour code and the Law Reforming Vocational Training (2008). The amended law entered into force on July 12 2019.
In line with the amended law, the Ministry of Education’s policy is to increase the attractiveness and efficiency of vocational training. In agreement with the professional chambers, the reform introduces technical adaptations to improve sustainably the quality of vocational training; this will in turn increase future professionals’ successful labour market integration and allow them to meet the skill demand of the professional sector better.
To overcome some organisational challenges of vocational training and to support learners’ progress, a first set of measures entered into force in 2016-17: 
the option to repeat a class (annual promotion) was reintroduced;
an intermediate assessment was set up;
each learner is provided with detailed information on the training programme before the start of their vocational training.
The amendments to the labour code and the law on reforming VET lead to further important changes in 2019.
Semi-annual school reports
The 2019 law brings changes to the semi-annual school reports. Aiming to inform learners and their parents better about their proficiency level, the reports continue to be based on the skills requirements students need to develop, but each competence will additionally be assessed with a score, as will each module. Grades up to 60 points are gradually being reintroduced from 2019-20 for all , DT (technician diploma), DAP (vocational aptitude diploma) and CCP (vocational capacity certificate).
Extension of training duration
The law defines conditions for extending the duration of training and a maximum duration for IVET: the training duration may be extended by one year if needed by the learners; a second extension of the apprenticeship contract for a maximum period of one year may be granted with the consent of the apprentice and the training company.
On-the-job vocational training model
The law also establishes an ‘on-the-job’ vocational training model; this will allow employees without a certification for the trade/profession they are practising to complete their training in parallel to their job, and obtain a diploma.
Legal protection of apprentices/trainees
To strengthen legal protection, the provisions of the apprenticeship contract and the internship agreement are incorporated into the labour code. The law also specifies the requirements training providers are subject to in order to obtain training authorisation.
Educational innovation projects
Finally, the law amendment enables the launch of educational innovation projects, a measure that has already been adopted in general and classical secondary education. This new framework allows students to explore innovative VET pathways without prior changes to VET legislation.
