EU AGENCIES JOIN 10-YEAR ANNIVERSARY OF EU’S FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS CHARTER
You are here
 »  »  » EU Agencies join 10-year anniversary of EU’s Fundamental Rights Charter

12 November 2019
The nine EU Justice and Home Affairs Agencies are marking the 10-year anniversary of the EU’s Charter of Fundamental Rights by pledging to continue to respect and promote fundamental rights throughout the work.
“Over the 10 years the Charter have impacted the way we approach our training and it has been an inspiration,”
says CEPOL Executive Director Dr. h. c. Detlef Schröder.
“In fact, our Agency’s founding Regulation clearly requests us to dedicate particular emphasis to the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the context of law enforcement training. We will continue to dedicate ourselves to this important aspect, deriving stimulus from the Charter. This joint commitment by the Justice and Home Affairs’ Agencies is a valid proof of Union’s dedication to the common values shared.”
The agencies have . This includes ensuring their work always complies with the Charter.
They will continue to uphold fundamental rights in their working practices such as promoting gender equality and diversity at work.
They will also run awareness raising activities, staff training, joint activities to increase awareness about the Charter and its entitlements.
In addition, they will continue to build and enhance their capacity to respect the Charter by sharing and exchanging best practices. This will form part of their regular network meetings of Justice and Home Affairs Agencies, chaired this year by the European Union Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation (Europol).
The nine agencies are the: European Union Agency for the Operational Management of Large-Scale IT Systems in the Area of Freedom, Security and Justice (eu-LISA); European Asylum Support Office (EASO); European Border and Coast Guard Agency (Frontex); European Institute for Gender Equality (EIGE); European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights (FRA); European Union Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation (Europol); European Union Agency for Law Enforcement Training (CEPOL); European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction (EMCDDA); European Union Judicial Cooperation Unit (EUROJUST).
It builds on a previous commitment by all EU agencies to strengthen  in their work. Read the statement in full .
The statement is being released during the  to mark 10 years of the Charter. The event is organised by the European Commission and the Finnish Presidency of the Council of the EU and FRA. It takes place in Brussels on 12 November.
