EBA consults on Guidelines on credit risk mitigation for institutions applying the IRB approach with own estimates of LGD 
25 February 2019
The European Banking Authority (EBA) launched today a consultation on its Guidelines on Credit Risk Mitigation in the context of the advanced internal rating-based (A-IRB) approach, aim to eliminate the remaining significant differences in approaches in the area of credit risk mitigation (CRM), which are either due to different supervisory practices or bank-specific choices. These draft Guidelines complement the , which focused on the standardised approach (SA) and the foundation-IRB approach (F-IRB). The consultation runs until 25 May 2019.
The Guidelines provide guidance on the application of the CRM provisions currently laid down in the Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR) applicable to institutions using the A-IRB Approach. In particular, they clarify the eligibility requirements for different CRM techniques, namely funded and unfunded credit protection (e.g. collateral and guarantees), available to institutions.
For funded credit protection, the Guidelines provide a mapping to the eligibility requirements of legal certainty and collateral valuation applicable to institutions using the SA and the A-IRB approach. The Guidelines also clarify how institutions may recognise the effects of different CRM techniques for capital requirement purposes. In particular, for unfunded credit protection they clarify the set of compliant approaches that are available to institutions to recognise the effects of the credit protection by adjusting their risk parameter estimates, i.e. the probability of default (PD) or the loss given default (LGD). Moreover, the Guidelines clarify whether exposure values or LGD estimates are to be adjusted to recognise different forms of funded credit protection, namely netting and collateral.
Consultation process
Responses to this consultation can be sent to the EBA by clicking on the "send your comments" button on the consultation page. Please note that the deadline for the submission of comments is 25 May 2019 2019.
A public hearing will take place at the EBA premises in Paris on 15 April 2019 from 14:00 to 16:00 CET time.
Legal basis and next steps
The EBA has developed the draft Guidelines on its own initiative, in accordance with Article 16 of its founding Regulation, which mandates the Authority to issue guidelines and recommendations addressed to competent authorities or financial institutions with a view to establishing consistent, efficient and effective supervisory practices within the ESFS, and to ensuring the common, uniform and consistent application of Union law.
