Member States to evaluate 74 substances in 2020-2022
ECHA/NR/19/38
ECHA proposes 74 substances for evaluation by Member States under the Community rolling action plan (CoRAP) for 2020-2022. If you have registered any of these substances, you should coordinate actions with your co-registrants and contact the evaluating competent authority. 
Helsinki, 23 October 2019 – At present, 14 substances are planned to be evaluated in 2020, while 60 substances are listed for evaluation in 2021 and 2022.
Registrants of a listed substance should start coordinating their actions and contact the evaluating Member State authority. Downstream users of a listed substance should review the information they have available and share it with the registrants. In particular, it is important that information on the uses are up to date and exposure scenarios and related exposure estimations are clearly documented within the registrants’ chemical safety reports. For the substances planned to be evaluated in 2020, the relevant dossier updates should be made before March 2020.
The draft plan has been prepared together with the Member States and includes the (non-confidential) substance names, the EC and CAS numbers, the tentative year of evaluation, the contact details of the proposed evaluating Member State, and an indication of the initial area of concern. The groups of structurally similar substances that could potentially be evaluated together are also marked in the draft plan.
Registrants can get an overview of substance-specific activities (including substance evaluation) using the . It offers companies one entry point to information about substances that authorities are working on.
Next steps
ECHA’s Member State Committee will discuss the draft CoRAP this week and will prepare an opinion on the draft plan in February 2020. Based on the opinion, ECHA will adopt and publish the CoRAP update for 2020-2022 in March 2020. From the date of publication onwards, the Member States have one year to prepare a draft decision requesting further information from the respective registrants to clarify potential concerns identified during evaluation.
