Biocidal Products Committee concludes on Union authorisations for disinfectants
ECHA/NR/19/09
 
The committee adopted seven opinions, including one on the approval of an active substance and five on Union authorisation.
 
Helsinki, 5 March 2019 – The Biocidal Products Committee (BPC) discussed three applications for the approval of an active substance. The BPC conluded that the following active substance should not be approved:
 
carbendazim for product-type 9 (fibre, leather, rubber and polymerised materials preservatives).
The committee’s opinion is that carbendazim, which meets the exclusion criteria, cannot be approved for product-type 9 because of unacceptable risks posed to the environment that cannot be mitigated.
Regarding the approval of two other active substances, the BPC requested the respective evaluating Member States to assess whether the active substances meet the new criteria for endocrine-disrupting properties before the committee adopts its opinions. The active substances are:
azametiphos for product-type 18 (insecticides, acaricides and products to control other arthropods); and
epsilon-metofluthrin for product-type 19 (repellents and attractants).
The BPC also adopted positive opinions supporting Union authorisation for:
two applications concerning biocidal product families based on iodine/PVP iodine in product-type 3 (veterinary hygiene disinfectants); and
three applications concerning biocidal product families based on propan-2-ol in product-type 2 (disinfectants and algaecides not intented for direct application to humans or animals) and product-type 4 (food and feed area disinfectants).
In addition, the committee adopted an opinion addressing a request from the European Commission on a dispute between Member States in a simplified authorisation procedure for a biocidal product.
The Commission together with the EU Member States will take the final decision on the approval of the active substances and on the Union authorisation of biocidal products.
The committee met from 26 February to 1 March 2019. The opinions will be available on ECHA’s website in the near future. The next meeting will be held in June 2019.
