EFECS2019 Pilot Lines Impact workshop

 

 




The EFECS co-located workshop “ECSEL Pilot lines success stories and impact” was successfully organised by STMicroelectronics in cooperation with its partners CEA- LETI,   TU Darmstadt, SOITEC, Global Foundries, LYNRED, Robert Bosch GmbH on Tuesday November 19th at Helsinki.

It provided a unique opportunity to share with EFECS participants the results of these ECSEL pilot lines and a common vision defined by 3 key attributes: Scale, Persistence and Excellence.  
Scale, by mobilizing large communities with a mix of companies and public research organizations and reinforcing partnerships. They had the critical mass to work along the technology/supply chain -From materials to product- and along the value chain to accelerate the co-innovation and market adoption and strengthen demand in Europe
Persistence and continuity, as these projects belong to a pipeline of ambitious projects around technologies such as FDSOI, RFSOI and memories for MCUs. 
These projects provided Excellence as the different examples of success stories can testify (link to presentations)
The presented projects were:
PANACHE: Developed an embedded flash technology platform dedicated to the design of innovative microcontrollers and their manufacturing. 
REFERENCE:  Developed innovative RF-SOI substrates & technologies (including move to 300mm) enabling the realization of integrated front-end modules, and system level demonstrators for cellular, aeronautics, paving the way to 5G.
POLIS: Developed differentiating technologies enabling the prototyping of a large range of innovative sensors and breakthrough micro-displays such as: Low-cost Infrared thermal sensors for consumer markets, high luminance low power micro-displays for augmented reality applications, gestures recognition sensors and depth-map camera based on Time-of-Flight, etc.
Lab4MEMS II: Developed innovative technologies on advanced Micro-Opto-Electro-Mechanical Systems. This Pilot line realized a variety of devices including optical switch, array of micro-mirrors, optical cross-connect, lasers and micro lens amongst others.
WAYTOGOFAST : Developed the competitiveness of FDSOI by offering higher performance node architectures in 22FDX and 28FDSOI and their substrate manufacturing.

