North Macedonia publishes its own Gender Equality Index
Print
Download as PDF
NEWS ARTICLE
PUBLICATION DATE:
07 November 2019

GaudiLab/Shutterstock.com
North Macedonia’s score of 62 points sits just below the EU average of 67.4 points. This places the country in 16th place in comparison with the EU countries. In the domain of power, the country scores better than the EU. North Macedonia has 52.6 points, compared to the EU average of 51.9. However, significant gender inequalities remain, especially when it comes to income and earnings, and the sharing of household responsibilities.  

“With its own Gender Equality Index, North Macedonia can now monitor its progress in gender equality. We encourage using the Index as a strategic guide for politicians in planning appropriate policy measures. We can see that the country has plenty of room for improvement in all domains, just as the EU countries. However, the high score in the domain of power certainly deserves recognition,” said Virginija Langbakk, the Director of the European Institute for Gender Equality.

North Macedonia earns its high score in the domain of power by having a high number of women members in the parliament, supported by a 17-year-old gender quota. There is also a solid representation of women in decision-making positions in research funding organisations and national broadcasting institutions.

 “The first national Gender Equality Index presents an opportunity to reaffirm the commitment and dedication of the Republic of North Macedonia to promoting gender equality and equal opportunities. Women and men must have equal access to opportunities and services planned and created in compliance with their specific needs. The status of women in our society demands not only promises, but also progress and a clearly defined approach, since that is what both the national standards and the real needs of women oblige us to achieve,” noted Jovana Trenchevska, State Secretary of the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy.

North Macedonia is the second of the EU candidate countries and potential candidates, after Serbia, to develop a Gender Equality Index. With more regional Indices available, the Western Balkan countries and Turkey will be able to compare their performance within the region and to learn from each other.

EIGE supported the development of the Index for North Macedonia, in cooperation with the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy and its Department for Equal Opportunities, the State Statistical Office and the UN Women Office in Skopje.

The Gender Equality Index in North Macedonia was developed under the EU Instrument of Pre-Accession (IPA) and was funded by the European Union.

Explore the report and find out more about gender equality in North Macedonia.