EIOPA establishes Consultative Expert Group on Digital Ethics in Insurance
NEWS
 
DATE:
 
17 Sep 2019
The European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA) established today its Consultative Expert Group on Digital Ethics in Insurance.
As a follow-up of its recent thematic review on the use of Big Data Analytics (BDA) in motor and health insurance, EIOPA established a Consultative Expert Group to assist the Authority in the development of digital responsibility principles in insurance.
The thematic review concluded that there are many opportunities arising from BDA and digitalisation more broadly, but also some risks that need to be further addressed. For this reason, the digital responsibility principles will address the use of new business models, technologies and data sources in insurance from the perspective of fairness and taking into account ethical considerations. While they are expected to cover different areas of the insurance value chain, specific focus will be given to pricing and underwriting, given their specific importance in the insurance sector.
The Consultative Expert Group may also act as a sounding board for EIOPA in other related policy initiatives in the area of InsurTech, for instance by supporting EIOPA in promoting a sound governance framework around the use of BDA tools such as Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning.
EIOPA's call for expression of interest of July 2019 resulted in an extraordinary group of high-level experts with a diverse set of experiences and expertise.
EIOPA is pleased to confirm the composition of its Consultative Expert Group on Digital Ethics in Insurance. For further details, please refer to the table below. 
The group will meet for the first time on Tuesday, 8 October.
Andreas Hufenstuhl, PricewaterhouseCoopers 
Antti Talonen, Tampere University 
Chris Holland, Loughborough University 
Chris K. Madsen, Aegon 
Christian Hugo, Hoffmann Syntherion 
Cristina Bellido Andujar, CaixaBank 
Daniel John, HUK-COBURG 
David Wassong ,Generali 
Desislav Danov, FinTech Guardian 
Edoardo Carlucci, Better Finance 
Esko Kivisaari, Actuarial Association of Europe 
Fernando Acevedo Frías, Independent consultant 
Florian Pons, Institute des Actuaires 
Gemma Garriga, Allianz 
Gert Meyers, KU Leuven 
Jasper De Meyer, BEUC 
Jaya Handa, Liberty  
Jens-Daniel, Florian Marsh 
João Torres Barreiro, Willis Towers Watson 
Lars Gatschke, Verbraucherzentrale Bundesverband e.V. 
Liisa Halme, If P & C Insurance  
Liz McFall, University of Edinburgh 
Lutz Wilhelmy,  Swiss Re 
Malika Labi, Europ Assistance   
Marcello Zacchetti, Cattolica Assicurazioni 
Marcin Detyniecki, AXA 
Martin Mullins, University of Limerick 
Mirko Kraft, Coburg University of Applied Sciences and Arts 
Olivier Jérusalmy, Finance Watch 
Owen Morris, Aviva  
Paolo Stefano Giudici, University of Pavia 
Pedro Écija Serrano, Grant Thornton 
Petra Žárská, Spoločnosť Ochrany Spotrebiteľov S.O.S 
Philippe Cotelle, Airbus 
Piotr Czublun, CZUBLUN TRĘBICKI Law Office  
Raymon Badloe, Achmea 
Reza Khorshidi, AIG 
Rui Ferreira, Zurich Insurance Group 
Thomas Brenøe, Insurance & Pension Denmark 
Virginia Antonini, Reale Mutua Assicurazioni 
