EIOPA determines principles for transparent, timely and clear information provision on pensions 
NEWS
 
DATE:
 
26 Mar 2019
In the context of the implementation of the IORP II Directive, the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA) published today a second .
This report complements EIOPA's first report , published on 13 November 2018.
It analyses national practices existing prior to the implementation of the IORP II Directive on the activities and supervision of institutions for occupational retirement provision (IORPs). It addresses in particular documents for obligatory disclosure to prospective members and members in the pre-retirement and pay-out phase.
Based on the analyses EIOPA together with the national supervisory authorities (NCAs) determined principles and guidance important for the consistent implementation of the IORP II requirements, which are as follows:
The calculation and presentation of past performance in the information to be provided to prospective members
The presentation of retirement options in the pre-retirement phase
The timing of issuance of documents during the pre-retirement phase
The communication channels used for the provision of information during the preretirement and the pay-out phase
The provision of clear and easy accessible information put in appropriate layers is key for prospective and pre-retirement members to plan and make informed decisions for retirement. Equally important is the right sequence of timing of the provision of information as well as the communication channels including the use of digital communication tools such as on-line tutorials, short videos and on line calculators.
As regards the presentation of the information EIOPA advices to conduct consumer testing to learn about the needs of consumers. To raise awareness the pension members should be informed following a systematic approach, i.e. starting five years prior to retirement.
The IORP II (Directive (EU) 2016/2341) on the activities and supervision of Institutions for Occupational Retirement Provision (IORPs) provides an updated European Union legislative framework for workplace pensions.
The Directive improves the governance of pension funds, makes it easier for pension funds to conduct cross-border business and provides clearer information to pension scheme members and beneficiaries.
The Member States of the European Union had to transpose these new rules into their national law by 13 January 2019.
