Global IoT leader joins EIT RawMaterials
News 18/11/2019 

, a global leader in the Internet of Things, joined  for sustainable development.
Across Europea, raw materials are used in transport and energy, in the construction and automotive sector, for machinery, chemicals or medical equipment, to name but a few. They play a crucial role in the economic growth and well-being of the population and are fundamental to Europe’s industrial activity.
Creating innovative and smart technology for the raw materials sector
For over a decade, has provided  to reduce risk and improve the efficiency of operations.
The raw material industry is making efforts to promote sustainable growth, and technology is the best ally for that. Introducing innovative products, processes and services has an impact on European competitiveness and employment. We are delighted to join the largest innovation community in the raw materials sector worldwide and consolidate interactions across Europe innovation ecosystems.
Ignasi Vilajosana, CEO & Co-founder, Worldsensing
Worldsensing’s wireless monitoring system, is currently deployed in more than 60 mines worldwide. Loadsensing connects mines to the Internet of Things (IoT), allowing automatic and remote data collection. The mine operator receives more reliable and frequent data, which enables better real-time monitoring of operations and mining assets.
EIT RawMaterials facilitates innovation projects that help adopt digital technologies in mines to improve productivity, minimise risks, and create a safer working environment.
About Loadsensing
is the leading wireless monitoring system allowing industrial companies to connect and wirelessly monitor infrastructures in remote locations. The data acquisition system is the industry reference for wireless geotechnical monitoring as it is currently used to monitor over 50 000 sensors worldwide. Loadsensing is compatible with most geotechnical instrumentation and monitoring sensors and may be integrated with various data visualisation software.
About Worldsensing
Worldsensing is a widely recognized global IoT pioneer. The Barcelona-based technology provider delivers Operational Intelligence to traditional industries and cities. With over 100 employees and offices in Barcelona, London, Los Angeles, and Singapore, Worldsensing is globally active and has already conducted projects in over 60 countries across six continents.
