EIT scales-up support for innovators across Europe in 2020 
News 04/12/2019 

In 2020, the  will invest EUR 500 million in its Knowledge and Innovation Communities across Europe – the EIT Governing Board decided.
This investment will drive European innovation in the areas of climate (), digitisation (), food (), health (), sustainable energy (), advanced and sustainable materials (), manufacturing () and urban mobility (). 

The EIT’s eight Knowledge and Innovation Communities competed for EUR 500 million and were evaluated against their strategies and business plans for 2020, as well as their performance to date. Based on this, the EIT Governing Board decided to allocate the following grants  (in order of their selection in 2009, 2014, 2016, and 2018*):
: EUR 78.4 million
: EUR 66.2 million 
: EUR 77.8 million

: EUR 85.1 million
: EUR 81.7 million

: EUR 55.1 million

: EUR 26.8 million
: EUR 28.8 million
The EIT Governing Board also decided to allocate EUR 30 million to the  - the programme that helps modest and moderate regions (according to the European Innovation Scoreboard) to fully realise their innovation potential through the sharing of good practice and experience from across the EIT Community. The EIT RIS fund will be available to all EIT Innovation Communities that include EIT RIS eligible activities in their 2020 Business Plans. The EIT Governing Board also decided to allocate EUR 12.5 million for joint activities between Knowledge and Innovation Communities, for example, in the areas of artificial intelligence and Skills 4 Future.
In addition, the EIT Governing Board put in place a Task Force on enhancing innovation and entrepreneurship in higher education institutions, in preparation for the EIT’s role in . The Task Force will be chaired by , Member of the EIT Governing Board, and will include representatives of the European Commission (DG EAC).
, Chairman of the EIT Governing Board, said: 'I am very pleased to see the progress in the past year which is strongly based on the focused stewardship of the EIT’s Governing Board. It is crucial that the opportunities for innovators, the EIT community offers, are scaled-up across the whole of Europe. Why? This investment is not just to create another product, or power another start-up; it’s to bring about the urgent need for more innovative European solutions at a much larger scale, to tackle pressing societal challenges.’    
Martin Kern, , added: 'The EIT is now Europe’s proven innovation engine and 2020 will see strong impact from our eight Knowledge and Innovation Communities, based on their submitted plans. Our results clearly show that the EIT’s investment delivers and turns ground-breaking ideas into products and services for a greener, healthier, more sustainable Europe. We particularly look forward to scaling up our support for innovators and entrepreneurs in countries where EIT Knowledge and Innovation Communities have a limited presence. I would like to thank the EIT Governing Board Members for their strong strategic steering of the EIT community.'
Investing in what works
The 2020 funding will step up activities for , , , including business creation and acceleration services, entrepreneurial educational programmes and innovation-driven research projects. These activities have been shown to work, delivering tangible impact for Europe. In 2020, the EIT Community plans to power 1000 start-ups and scale-ups and launch more than 360 new products and services to contribute to Europe’s efforts of tackling global challenges. More than 900 students are expected to graduate from EIT labelled master and doctoral programmes, strengthening the pool of talented and entrepreneurially-minded change agents eager to transform their best ideas into solutions for Europe. It is foreseen that in 2020 alone, ventures supported by the EIT-Community will raise over EUR 400 million in external capital.
Since the EIT was set up in 2008, it has created Europe’s largest innovation community, with more than 1 000 partners and 50 innovation hubs. This has delivered support to more than 2 000 start-ups and scale-ups, created more than 6 100 jobs and more than 900 new products and services. More than 2 200 students have graduated from EIT-labelled master and doctoral programmes. To date, EIT-supported ventures have raised more than EUR 1.5 billion in external capital.
