Meeting highlights from the Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP) 16-19 September 2019
 
Share
News 20/09/2019
Seven new medicines recommended for approval
EMA’s human medicines committee () recommended seven medicines for approval at its September 2019 meeting.
The Committee recommended granting a  for Xospata* (gilteritinib) for the treatment of adult patients who have relapsed or refractory acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) with a FLT3 mutation. AML is a rare type of cancer of the white blood cells (cells that fight infections). It affects approximately 1 in 10,000 people in the European Union. Xospata was reviewed under EMA's  procedure, reserved for medicines of major public health interest.
Qtrilmet (metformin hydrochloride / saxagliptin / dapagliflozin) received a positive opinion from the  for the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus.
The  recommended granting a  for Rhokiinsa (netarsudil) for the treatment of patients with glaucoma or ocular hypertension.
Senstend (lidocaine / prilocaine), which was evaluated in an , received a positive opinion for the treatment of premature ejaculation in adult men. An  makes use of data from the dossier of a previously authorised medicine, with the  of that medicine giving consent for the use of their data in the application.
The  recommended granting  for three : Arsenic trioxide Accord (arsenic trioxide), for the treatment of acute promyelocytic leukaemia; Bortezomib Fresenius Kabi(bortezomib), for the treatment of multiple myeloma and mantle cell lymphoma; and Ivozall (clofarabine), for the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia in paediatric patients.
Eight recommendations on extensions of therapeutic indication
The Committee recommended extensions of  for Bavencio, Benlysta, Docetaxel Zentiva, Dupixent, Lucentis, Remsima, Taxotere and Trulicity. 
Agenda and minutes
The agenda of the September 2019 meeting is published on EMA's website. Minutes of the July 2019 meeting will be published in the coming weeks.
CHMP statistics
Key figures from the September 2019  meeting are represented in the graphic below.
*This product was designated as an  during its development.  are reviewed by EMA's  () at the time of approval to determine whether the information available to date allows maintaining the medicine's orphan status and granting the medicine ten years of .
