‘Regulatory science to 2025’: live broadcast of post-consultation workshop on veterinary medicines
 
Share
News 28/11/2019
The European Medicines Agency is hosting a  on 5-6 December.
The draft strategy sets out working proposals on the key areas in which EMA intends to engage. The goal of the strategy is to ensure that the Agency has the regulatory tools to continue supporting the  and fulfil its ongoing mission in light of upcoming scientific challenges. The final strategy is expected in early 2020.
The purpose of the workshop is to discuss the , reflect on the prioritisation of core recommendations and identify concrete actions to implement the key goals and recommendations. The workshop follows a  of the strategy.
An  , which will be held at EMA’s premises in Amsterdam, is available. Both the plenary and breakout sessions can be followed via live broadcast on the . 
EMA’s ‘Regulatory Science Strategy to 2025’ was released for public consultation between December 2018 and June 2019. Around 150 individuals and organisations across a broad range of stakeholder groups submitted  which EMA has published in a partially anonymised format. The principle objective of the consultation was to allow stakeholders to engage with the proposed strategy and express their views on future priorities and where resources should be best attributed. 
The presentations and audio recordings of this workshops will be made available.
Remote participants are encouraged to submit comments by email to: and participants are encouraged to tweet using the following hashtag: #RegScience2025.
 
Key priorities of EMA’s Regulatory Science Strategy to 2025
The ‘Regulatory Science Strategy to 2025’ identifies key areas where new or enhanced engagement of the network is essential and where advances in regulatory science will need to be adopted. The four strategic goals of the strategy are:
catalysing the integration of science and technology in medicine development;
driving collaborative evidence generation -  improving the scientific quality of evaluations;
addressing emerging health threats and availability/therapeutic challenges;
enabling and leveraging research and innovation in regulatory science.
