Committee for Medicinal Products for Veterinary Use (CVMP) meeting of 15-16 April 2019
 
Share
Press release 23/04/2019
CVMP recommends amendments to the product information for Cytopoint
CVMP opinions on veterinary medicinal products
The Committee adopted by consensus a positive opinion for a grouped  application for Suvaxyn PRRS MLV to reduce the onset of immunity and implement changes to the .
The Committee adopted by consensus a positive opinion for a  application for Broadline concerning quality changes.
The Committee adopted by consensus positive opinions for the following  applications (subject to  procedures):
Porcilis PCV M Hyo and , to change the  to allow concurrent administration with Porcilis PRRS.
Leucogen, Leucofeligen FeLV-RCP and Nobivac LeuFeL, to amend the  to reflect that a beneficial effect of the feline leukaemia virus (FeLV) vaccination is observed 3 weeks after the first injection of the primary vaccination.
 of 
The Committee adopted by consensus a positive opinion for the  of the  for Osurnia. The Committee, having re-assessed the benefit-risk balance of the product, concluded that the quality, safety and  continue to be appropriately demonstrated and, therefore, recommended the indefinite  of the .

The Committee adopted by consensus a positive opinion recommending the establishment of  for bambermycin in rabbits.
More information about the above recommendation will be published on the Agency’s website.

The Committee adopted two separate  reports further to requests for:
Initial advice on quality, safety and  issues for a new veterinary  for a musculoskeletal disorder  in horses; and
Initial advice on safety and  issues for a new antiparasitic veterinary  for dogs.
Minor use, minor species (MUMS)/limited market
Following the Committee’s review of three requests for classification under the MUMS/limited market policy, the  classified:
An immunological product for horses as indicated for MUMS/limited market and eligible for reduced data requirements, where applicable. The product is not eligible for financial incentives as according to the MUMS policy, products for horses are generally not eligible for fee incentives.
A product (cardiovascular system) for  as indicated for MUMS/limited market and eligible for reduced data requirements, where applicable. The product is not eligible for financial incentives as it is intended for use in a non-food-producing species.
An immunological product for cattle as indicated for MUMS/limited market and eligible for both reduced data requirements, where applicable, and financial incentives.

The Committee reviewed the PSURs for Respiporc FLUpan H1N1, SevoFlo, Suvaxyn Circo MH+RTU, Virbagen Omega and Zeleris, and concluded that no further action or changes to their were required.
The Committee also reviewed the PSUR for Cytopoint and recommended amendments to the .
Organisational matters
The Committee finalised the preparation of the  and / Presidency meetings to be held under the Romanian Presidency of the EU, on 6-8 May 2019. The discussions will focus on:
New Veterinary Regulation: Impact on the ;
Functioning of  Working Parties;
SPC harmonisation: approach to prioritising of products
Veterinary  for honey bees.
