EMA advises companies on steps to take to avoid nitrosamines in human medicines
 
Share
Press release 26/09/2019
EMA’s human medicines committee () is requesting as a matter of precaution that  for human medicines containing chemically synthesised  review their medicines for the possible presence of nitrosamines and test all products at risk. If nitrosamines are detected in any of their medicines,  must inform authorities promptly so that appropriate regulatory actions can be taken.
A   to this effect is being sent out to  with information on the actions they should take. A  document is also available on EMA’s website.
 are responsible for ensuring that every batch of their finished product is of satisfactory quality, including the  and other ingredients used to make them. They should take into account the published guidance along with knowledge of the manufacturing processes for their products and all other relevant scientific evidence.
Nitrosamines are classified as probable human carcinogens, which means that long-term exposure above certain levels may increase the risk of cancer. They are present in some foods and drinking water supplies and where they have been found in medicines the risk of developing cancer has been .
Although nitrosamines are not expected to form during the manufacture of the vast majority of medicines containing chemically synthesised , it is important that all companies who have not already done so take appropriate precautionary measures, if necessary, in line with recommendations from the recently concluded .
EMA will continue working closely with national authorities,  and international partners to ensure that companies are taking appropriate measures to prevent nitrosamine impurities from being present in their products.
In the meantime, the  will continue evaluating available scientific knowledge on the presence of nitrosamines in medicines and advise regulatory authorities on actions to take if companies find nitrosamines in their medicines.
Patients and healthcare professionals are advised to continue using their medicines as normal taking into account recommendations in the .
