Committee for Medicinal Products for Veterinary Use (CVMP) meeting of 19-21 March 2019
 
Share
Press release 22/03/2019
At its first meeting in Amsterdam  adopts recommendations for two new initial and one extension.
CVMP opinions on veterinary medicinal products
The Committee adopted by consensus a positive opinion for an initial  for Afoxolaner MERIAL (afoxolaner), an  from MERIAL, a new product for the treatment of flea and tick infestations, demodicosis and sarcoptic mange in dogs. In an , reference is made to an authorised medicine and the  of the reference medicine has given consent to the use of their dossier in the application procedure.
The Committee adopted by consensus a positive opinion for an initial  for Baycox Iron (toltrazuril/iron (as gleptoferron)), from Bayer Animal Health GmbH, a new product for piglets for the concurrent prevention of clinical signs of coccidiosis (such as diarrhoea) in neonatal piglets on farms with a confirmed history of coccidiosis caused by Cystoisospora suis, and prevention of iron deficiency anaemia.
The Committee adopted by consensus a positive opinion for an extension of the existing  for Innovax ND-IBD, from Intervet International B.V., to add a new  (in ovo) for chicken embryonated eggs.
The Committee adopted by majority a positive opinion for a  application for Vectra 3D to change the legal status from prescription-only to non-prescription veterinary medicine.
The Committee adopted by consensus positive opinions for the following  applications:
ProZinc concerning the addition of dogs as a new target species;
MS-H Vaccine and for ProZinc, both concerning quality changes;
CLYNAV and CYTOPOINT (grouped), also concerning quality changes.
The Committee adopted by consensus a positive opinion for a  application (subject to a  procedure) for Simparica and MiPet Easecto to update the  to implement the outcome of a PSUR assessment.
More information about the above mentioned medicines, including their full , will be published on the Agency’s website.
Renewals of marketing authorisation
The Committee adopted by consensus positive opinions for the  of the  for Nobilis IB Primo QX, Suvaxyn PCV and Versican Plus Pi/L4R. The Committee, having re-assessed the benefit-risk balance of these products, concluded that the quality, safety and  continue to be appropriately demonstrated and, therefore, recommended the  of the . Based on  grounds, the Committee concluded that a further 5-year  is required for Versican Plus Pi/L4R. An indefinite authorisation was recommended for Nobilis IB Primo QX and Suvaxyn PCV.
Scientific advice
The Committee adopted 3 separate  reports further to requests for:
Initial advice on quality, safety and  issues for an immunological veterinary  for chickens;
Initial advice on  issues for an antiparasitic veterinary  for ;
Initial advice on  issues for a veterinary  for a cardiovascular disease in dogs.
Minor use, minor species (MUMS)/limited market
Following the Committee’s review of 4 requests for classification under the MUMS/limited market policy, the  classified:
A dermatological product for dogs as indicated for MUMS/limited market and eligible for reduced data requirements, where applicable. The product is not eligible for financial incentives as it is intended for use in non-food producing species.
A product (genito-urinary system and sex hormones) for sheep as indicated for MUMS/limited market and eligible for both reduced data requirements, where applicable, and financial incentives.
A product (musculo-skeletal system) for dogs as not indicated for MUMS/limited market.
A product (musculo-skeletal system) for horses as indicated for MUMS/limited market and eligible for reduced data requirements, where applicable. The product is not eligible for financial incentives as according to the MUMS policy, products for horses are generally not eligible for fee incentives.
Following the Committee’s review of a request for reclassification under the MUMS/limited market policy, the  also reclassified a product (immunologicals) for rainbow trout as indicated for MUMS/limited market and eligible for both reduced data requirements, where applicable, and financial incentives.
Pharmacovigilance
The Committee reviewed the PSURs for CaniLeish, Cimalgex, EVALON, Imestor, LETIFEND, Procox and Veraflox, and concluded that no further action or changes to their  were required.
,  and SOPs
Quality
The Committee adopted questions and answers on the use of peptone in the manufacture of via fermentation process, which were adopted by the  at their February meeting and will be published on the Agency’s website.
International harmonisation
The Committee adopted two VICH  for publication and implementation in the EU following the sign-off by the VICH Steering Committee:
GL57 on studies to evaluate the metabolism and residue kinetics of veterinary drugs in food-producing species: marker residue depletion studies to establish product  in aquatic species (EMA//VICH/517152/2013);
GL36(R2) on microbiological ADI: VICH GL36 (R2) on general approach to establish a microbiological ADI (EMA//VICH/467/2003-Rev.2). The change introduced in this revised document is limited to the figure given for the size of the human colon.
The  will be published on the Agency’s website.
