Global public meeting on draft ICH guideline on clinical trials
Share
News 30/08/2019

The global guidance for the conduct of  is currently undergoing a major revision. As part of the worldwide consultation process, the  is organising a . EMA is encouraging its stakeholders to register for this meeting, which will be held on 31 October 2019 at the United States  headquarters in Silver Spring, Maryland, United States of America. Participants will be able to attend in person or via webcast.
The  sets out general scientific principles for the conduct, performance and control of . In recent years,  have undergone a radical transformation with a wider range of both trial designs and data sources being used in drug development. Therefore,  initiated a revision of the E8  to address all the aspects that were not covered by the current version of the guidance. 
The revision aims to provide up-to-date and flexible guidance on  designs and data sources that can support regulatory and other health-policy decisions while ensuring that fundamental principles, such as the protection of  participants and assurance of data quality, are maintained.
This is the first step outlined in the process of renovation of  (GCP), described in the . The  contains the  proposal for further modernisation of the   related to  design, planning, management, and conduct. The scope of the proposed renovation includes the current E8  and further revision to the E6  for .
The  was released for public consultation in May 2019 and it will remain open until 30 September 2019.
The purpose of the public meeting is to provide information and gather feedback from a broad range of stakeholder groups not represented in . The viewpoints and concerns expressed by external stakeholders will feed into the revision process of this fundamental .
The meeting will be held on 31 October 2019, 8:30 – 18:00, at the FDA headquarters in Silver Spring, Maryland, USA. Participants can , on a first-come, first-served basis. More information, including on how to register, is available on the .
ICH is an international non-profit association that brings together regulatory authorities from around the globe and experts from the pharmaceutical industry to discuss scientific and technical aspects of medicines registration to enable truly global deployment of innovative approaches in drug development.
