Committee for Medicinal Products for Veterinary Use (CVMP) meeting of 3-5 December 2019
 
Share
Press release 06/12/2019
 adopts an updated advice on the categorisation of antibiotics in the European Union, and recommendations on the use of live attenuated PRRSV vaccines
CVMP opinions on veterinary medicinal products
The Committee adopted by consensus a positive opinion for a grouped  application for Onsior to add a new therapeutic  for the treatment of pain and inflammation associated with soft tissue surgery in dogs and to amend the  due to new clinical data. The Committee also adopted by consensus a positive opinion for a grouped  application for Eravac to extend the duration of immunity from 9 to 12 months. The Committee also adopted by consensus positive opinions for grouped  applications for Apoquel, Circovac and Zactran concerning quality-related changes.
The Committee adopted by consensus a positive opinion for a  application for Nobilis IB 4-91 to include the claim for associated non-mixed use with Innovax-ND-IBD and to update the . The Committee also adopted by consensus positive opinions for  applications for Zulvac SBV and for Innovax ILT, both concerning quality-related changes.
The Committee adopted by consensus positive opinions for  applications (subject to 

worksharing procedures) for Simparica and MiPet Easecto, and for Bravecto and Bravecto Plus, both concerning quality-related changes.
The Committee adopted by consensus a negative final opinion for a  application for Velactis, further to the  of the opinion adopted during the Committee meeting in September 2019. In August 2016, the  for Velactis was suspended by the European Commission (C(2016)5480 (final)) because of target animal safety concerns. This  was submitted with the intention to fulfil the conditions for the lifting of the suspension. However, the  concluded that the overall benefit-risk balance remains negative and recommended that the suspension of the  of Velactis is maintained.
More information about the above-mentioned medicines, including their full , will be published on the Agency’s website.
Community referrals and related procedures
The Committee concluded the  procedure for Ketabel 100 mg/ml solution for injection and associated names (ketamine) from Bela-Pharm GmbH & Co. KG. The matter was referred to the Committee by France as the  in the 

decentralised procedure, under Article 33 (4) of Directive 2001/82/EC, due to concerns raised by Germany regarding the appropriateness of the  when this veterinary  is administered via the intramuscular route to cattle, pigs, sheep and goats. The Committee adopted by consensus an opinion concluding that the objections raised by Germany during the 

decentralised procedure should not prevent the granting of a .
The Committee concluded the  procedure for veterinary  containing tylosin base (as single ) presented as solutions for injection for intramuscular use in pigs. The matter was referred to the Committee by France under Article 35 of Directive 2001/82/EC due to concerns relating to the appropriateness of the  in pigs. The Committee agreed that the maximum injection volume per site and the  for pig meat and offal should be amended to provide assurance for consumer safety. The Committee adopted by majority an opinion concluding that the  for the concerned products should be varied in order to amend the accordingly.
Maximum residue limits
The Committee agreed to include bovine casein hydrolysate in a list of biological substances considered as not requiring an MRL evaluation in accordance with Regulation (EU) No. 2018/782 and adopted this list (EMA//572629/2009).
The document, following consultation with the EC, will be published on the Agency’s website.
Scientific advice
The Committee adopted three separate  reports further to requests for:
Initial advice on quality, safety and  issues for a new veterinary  for musculoskeletal disorder  in dogs;
Initial advice on quality, safety and  issues for a new veterinary  for musculoskeletal disorder  in dogs;
Initial advice on quality, safety and  issues for a new veterinary  for musculoskeletal disorder  in horses.
Minor use, minor species (MUMS)/limited market
Following the Committee’s review of one request for classification under the MUMS/limited market policy, the  classified a product (antineoplastic and immunomodulating agents) for dogs as indicated for MUMS/limited market and eligible for reduced data requirements, where applicable. The product is not eligible for financial incentives as it is intended for use in non-food producing species.
Pharmacovigilance
The Committee reviewed the PSURs for Coliprotec F4/F18, NexGard Spectra, Rheumocam, UBAC, Versican Plus DHPPi, Versican Plus DHPPi L4R, Versican Plus L4, Versican Plus Pi, Versican Plus Pi L4 and Versican Plus Pi L4R, and concluded that no further action was required.
Concept papers, guidelines and SOPs
Antimicrobials
The Committee adopted the update of the  on the categorisation of antibiotics in the European Union prepared by the Antimicrobial Advice ad hoc Expert Group (AMEG) following the close of the public consultation. The initial  was adopted in 2014 and the request from the European Commission for the updated categorisation followed the need to take account of new information available and to refine the criteria applied. The comments received during the consultation procedure have been considered for the revision of the  and were also adopted for publication by the Committee.
Both documents, the revised advice and the comments received during consultation, will be published on the Agency’s website after their adoption by  which is foreseen for the December meeting of the  on 9-12 December 2019.
International harmonisation
The Committee adopted the  VICH GL58 on stability testing of new veterinary drug substances and  in Climatic Zones III and IV for implementation at step 7 following the sign-off by the VICH Steering Committee
The  will be published on the Agency’s website.
Organisational matters
The Committee adopted the  work plan for 2020, which highlights the priority areas for the Committee in the coming year.
The  work plan for 2020 will be published on the Agency’s website.
CVMP recommendation on the use of live attenuated PRRSV vaccines
The  is aware of a recombination event between two live attenuated Porcine Reproductive and Respiratory Syndrome virus (PRRSV) type 1 vaccine strains leading to a recombinant strain that has been associated with clinical signs of disease in PRRS-naïve herds in Denmark.
Recombination between strains of PRRS virus, including live type 1 PRRSV vaccine strains, is a known phenomenon that has been reported in the scientific literature. Therefore, recombinations of PRRSV strains similar to the one observed in Denmark may occur elsewhere at any time.
The  makes the following recommendations concerning the use of live attenuated PRRSV vaccines:
In order to limit the potential risk of recombination between vaccine strains, the simultaneous or consecutive use of different live attenuated PRRSV vaccines should be avoided as much as possible while continuing to protect animal health.
Increased monitoring of any suspected  relating to clinical signs of PRRS, including the occurrence of relevant clinical signs of the disease in vaccinated herds, is recommended. Any suspected  should be reported to the  for veterinary medicines or the . Clinical signs of PRRS include reduced fertility, increased rate of abortions, reduced appetite, increased piglet mortality and respiratory distress.
It should be noted that sequence data indicating recombination between vaccine strains or between vaccine strains and wild types should be regarded as relevant  data and therefore should be reported.
