Focus on the European Neighbourhood Policy area: news from EU4Monitoring Drugs, the EMCDDA’s new technical cooperation project
This content was published in the  released on 3.7.2019. This update also presents a section on partnerships and related activities, upcoming events, and a research corner.
EU4MD — Inception phase
In 2019, the EMCDDA launched a new technical cooperation project called EU4Monitoring Drugs (EU4MD). The three-year project, funded by the European Union, will involve countries in the European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) area, supporting national and regional readiness to identify and respond to drug-related security and health threats.  
Technical assessment visits have already been conducted to Armenia, Georgia, Palestine*, Lebanon, Moldova, and Ukraine, where a team of security and health experts met with a range of stakeholders from the Ministries of Justice, Home Affairs, Internal Affairs and Health, national and international NGOs, and other international partners, such as the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC).
Key priorities were identified in consultation with the stakeholders. Priorities in addressing drug supply included the need for technical support in monitoring drug markets and supply, intelligence gathering, training law enforcement agents on new psychoactive substances, and monitoring of drug sales on the darknet. Priorities in addressing drug demand included technical capacity building on drug monitoring, particularly on drug monitoring tools such as general population surveys, wastewater analysis, trendspotter studies, needle and syringe residue analysis, and surveys on drug use in prison settings. Interest was also expressed in the adapted Universal Prevention Curriculum, and in enhancing monitoring of drug-related deaths by joining the EURO-DEN network.
Proposed activities will be further discussed by the project’s national counterparts during the EU4MD Advisory Committee meeting which will take place in Brussels over the summer. Project kick-off meetings in the eastern and southern ENP regions are scheduled for the following months.
 * This designation shall not be construed as recognition of a State of Palestine and is without prejudice to the individual positions of the Member States on this issue.
