VET centre stage in Azerbaijan: ETF enhancing EU Education Support
25 NOV 2019
A monitoring mission by the ETF to support vocational education and training (VET), under the European Union Education Support Programme (2017-2019), is taking place in Azerbaijan on 25 and 26 November. The EU's programme includes a grant scheme for multifunctional training centres enabling a labour market oriented VET system as part of the national strategy for education development.  The ETF is supporting the  with content and methodological advice on the grant scheme and, as a follow up to monitoring missions, recommendations on enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of the scheme’s implementation. 
A number of VET schools benefit from the scheme which is implemented by the Local Government Association and other donors. VET schools in Djalilabad and Ganja regions are being visited during this third mission of the ETF.  took place in the Ismayli and Barda regions, respectively.
The findings of the monitoring missions will be discussed at a high-level event taking place 28 and 29 November in Baku, attended by the Deputy Minister of Education, Idris Isayev, and the Head of the Delegation of the European Union to Azerbaijan, Ambassador Kestutis Jankauskas. This event will share experiences, good practice and findings of the EU Education Support Programme and the  2018 -2020, to identify actions addressing the recommendations in further support of the VET sector. 
Participants will include representatives from government institutions, the Ministry of Education, the State Agency for Vocational Education, organisations implementing Action Grants, VET schools, donors, the EU Delegation and the ETF.
Background
The European Union (EU) Annual Action Programme 2014 (AAP 2014) for Azerbaijan includes support to the education and training sector, of approximately EUR 19 MEUR. The intervention covers the support of VET reform implementation, development and implementation of the National Qualifications Framework, and a grant scheme for modernisation of multifunctional training centres. The grant scheme focuses on the regions/districts of Gabala, Ismayilly, Gakh, Ganja, Jalilabad and Barda.
