2/01/2019
High-Level ETIAS Seminar held in Warsaw 
A High-Level seminar on ETIAS co-organised by eu-LISA, Europol, the European Commission and Frontex, took place in Warsaw on 21 January 2019.
The aim of the seminar was twofold: 1) to raise awareness on the project and the various stakeholder roles and 2) to help Member States move forward with their decision making processes on organisational matters. 
Member State representation was high with representatives coming mostly from ministries, police and border guard forces as well as SIRENE authorities. Including participants from the organising institutions, there were close to 100 attendees.
Krum Garkov, Executive Director of eu-LISA, explained that the meeting was taking place at the right time as the need to map out tasks and prepare is now. ETIAS, he noted, is arguably the most complex project currently underway in terms of border management and requires close collaboration. Mr Garkov emphasised that ETIAS was about more than technology, as it will change how border guards work and have significant effects on the travel industry as a whole.
The European Commission emphasised the important work that Member States need to be ready for in terms of connecting to the ETIAS system whilst noting the pressure to complete developments within the set timeframe. 
Frontex expressed their appreciation for the support of the organising parties and their spirit of constructive cooperation that would be vital for further progress with ETIAS.
Europol noted from the outset their full commitment to and engagement in the cooperative work to come on ETIAS, noting it to be an important milestone on the way to interoperability.
Member States appreciated the seminar and the opportunity to compare their plans and readiness with one another with regard to implementing ETIAS within their national environments.
A similar seminar will be held later this year during which further practicalities will be discussed and shared. 
ETIAS; European Institutions; Member States
