28/03/2019
Extended Deadline - Working Group for Carriers 
eu-LISA is establishing a Working Group for carriers and calling on carrier associations to express their interest to participate in this Working Group.
The Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement dated 14 June 1985 (), the Entry/Exit System (EES)  and the European Travel Information and Authorisation System (ETIAS)  set out obligations for carriers in the European Union (including air and sea carriers and international carriers transporting groups overland by coach).
In order to successfully implement the EES Regulation and the ETIAS Regulation, the European Union Agency for the Operational Management of Large-Scale IT Systems in the Area of Freedom, Security and Justice (eu-LISA) is looking to establish a Working Group (WG) for carriers and is calling on carrier associations to express their interest in participating in this Working Group. The WG will be a coordination body between eu-LISA and carrier associations. It will be led by eu-LISA, function under the umbrella of the EES-ETIAS Advisory Group of the Agency and directly report to it.  
The purpose of the WG is to provide, amongst others, awareness to carriers about their obligations stemming from the EES and ETIAS Regulations and facilitate the alignment of carrier activities with the planning for the entry into operation of the two new IT systems.
In order to foster constructive discussions, eu-LISA intends to keep the number of participants in the WG limited to senior representatives of carrier associations that operate air and sea routes as well as international carriers that transport groups overland by coach. The WG may decide, on an ad-hoc basis, to invite advisors or experts to WG meetings if considered necessary.
Interested carrier associations, in particular operational at EU and/or regional levels, should send an email to  with the following subject line: 'Expression of interest in the Working Group for Carriers' no later than 15 April 2019. In the email please indicate name, email address, position and association of the proposed member*.
The first meeting of the WG is foreseen to be organised by eu-LISA in the course of spring 2019.

 
Footnote*
eu-LISA processes personal data in accordance with the Regulation (EU) 2018/1725 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data by the Union institutions, bodies, offices and agencies and on the free movement of such data. For more information, including how to exercise your rights of access, rectification, erasure and restriction of processing personal data, see the data protection notice, available .

ETIAS; EES; Governing bodies; Partners; Smart borders
