Eurojust gets European award for contribution to judicial and investigative journalism 
25/11/2019
Eurojust has received the European Award for Judicial and Investigative Journalism 2019, during a ceremony in Naples, for its contribution to the fight against organised crime and mafia-style organisations. The award was handed to Eurojust Vice-President and National Member for Italy Mr Filippo Spiezia, by the Association of the European Award for Judicial and Investigative Journalism. The association particularly praises Eurojust for taking on organised crime with big, concerted operations, such as Operation Pollino last year, which led to the arrest of 84 suspects linked to the ‘Ndrangheta.
Mr Spiezia said: ‘It’s a great honour for Eurojust and our work that we receive this award. It recognises the role a broader and coordinated cooperation can play in tackling organised crime, by joining forces in the very practical way we do at Eurojust. This award is a great encouragement for all of us to continue the fight against cross-border crime. No week goes by, when we don’t conclude a successful operation to take on organised crime.’
Eurojust received the award in the special category of European Member States and Cooperation in Combatting Mafia-Style Organisations. This year, the European Judicial and Investigative Journalism Prize was awarded for the fourth time, after its launch in 2012. The jury praises Eurojust for its important role in coordinating complex cross-border investigations into organised crime. 
In its report, the Jury states: 'Eurojust, through its activities, is a real bond between the European Judicial Authorities, thus contributing to safeguarding us all against global and unified criminal action. Eurojust, via its efforts for a fairer, freer and more civilized Europe, leads to the inspiration of the same principles and the same values of spreading the culture of European legality and beyond.'
Photo: © Association of the European Award for Judicial and Investigative Journalism
