FCH JU LAUNCHES NEW CALL FOR PROJECT PROPOSALS
Brussels, 30 January 2018
The Fuel Cells and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking (FCH JU) has published on 15 January a new call for proposals. €80.8 million are available for developing research and demonstration projects in the field of fuel cells and hydrogen (FCH) technologies. 
Hydrogen Valley
Addressing the sectoral integration aspect through ‘Hydrogen Valleys’ is a priority for this year’s call.
This new topic was introduced as the next logical step towards the market introduction of FCH technologies at regional scale, with the purpose of developing local/regional hydrogen value chains and integrating the use of FCH technologies across different sectors and applications, thus creating the hydrogen valley.
The maximum FCH JU contribution that a project may request under this topic is EUR 20 million, out of the €80.8 million allocated to the call.
International cooperation 
International collaboration is strongly encouraged under the call, in particular cooperation with member countries participating in the  and in the  (IPHE). The cooperation and cross-fertilization at international level will help improve access to global talent, innovation networks and value chains, and leverage the expertise of other regions of the world.  This cooperation will benefit the European hydrogen and fuel cell stakeholders in both maturing their products and expanding their markets. Collaboration with developing world countries supported by  under the UN Environment Programme is also encouraged. 
Through the new projects the FCH JU aims as well to reinforce the European supply and value chain of critical key components (e.g. a higher range of common/standardised parts to be produced in the EU and H2020 Associated Countries) and to enable initial investments in production facilities. 
More information:
The notice of publication of the call for proposals 2019 can be found on the EU  . 
FCH 2 JU related Documents: 
All other documents related to the call are common to  and can be found on the .
