HYDROGEN FOR IPCEI CONFERENCE
The next conference/info-session on Hydrogen for Important Projects of Common European Interest (IPCEI) will take place in Brussels on the 15th of January 2020, in the European Commission premises (BREY Auditorium, Avenue d'Auderghem 45, 1040 Brussels).
This conference aims to:
inform participants about the concept of Important Projects of Common European Interest, including process, opportunities and limitations, as well as other sources of financing for large-scale industrial development.
present a number of major large-scale Hydrogen projects as examples
facilitate extensive match-making between participants in order to find the required industrial partners for the implementation of existing and new projects
The event agenda and the registration form are available .
If you would like to deliver a pitch at the conference (duration: 2 minutes) please send by 8th of January 2020 at the latest a half-page WORD document to describe your idea to . This will serve the basis for the selection of the most relevant 10-15 pitches to be presented during the event. All selected companies will be informed in due time about the results of the selection.
The pitches should be about new project ideas or developed FCH technologies/products that shall reach the level of scale-up expected in potential Hydrogen IPCEI projects in the next 5 years.
In general, the projects for IPCEI go far beyond the scale of usual grant R&I projects, including substantial need for investment from different sources of funding/financing. Companies envisaging massive product scale-up might deliver a pitch relevant to more than one IPCEI.
Clear KPIs including investment, target partners, expected revenues and production volumes should back-up your pitch (see example of more advanced projects ).
The workshop is open to the public and therefore, due to limited capacity, a confirmation of registration will be provided based on the interest of participants and/or contribution to the event (with limited places for research actors, depending on availability). The conference will be held in English and participants may also follow it via web streaming (link to be provided before the event).
