INVITATION TO THE FCH JU STAKEHOLDER FORUM & PROGRAMME REVIEW DAYS 
On behalf of Valerie Bouillon-Delporte, Chair of the FCH 2 JU Governing Board and Bart Biebuyck, FCH 2 JU Executive Director, we are pleased to invite you to join us for the 2019 edition of our flagship events: the FCH JU Programme Review Days and Stakeholder Forum.
The events will take place on 19-21 November 2019 in Brussels, and bring together the hydrogen industry community to facilitate an open discussion on the impact, achievements and strategic direction of the FCH JU programme. The latest developments in the sector (at European and global level) will be presented as well. 
 for both events is now open and will close on 12 November 2019. 
Venue: Charlemagne Building, Rue de la Loi 170, 1000 Brussels, Belgium.
 
The Programme Review Days (PRD) - 19-20 November 2019
 aims to give an overview on the progress of the FCH JU funded projects. It constitutes an excellent visibility platform for the projects and the technological developments achieved in the sector, and provides networking opportunities for the participants while facilitating the exchange of ideas and best practices.
A number of 27 projects and 3 studies will be featured this year, gathered around the following sessions:
Hydrogen for Sectoral Integration
Fuel Cell Applications for Energy
Fuel Cell Applications for Transport
Support for Market Uptake
The Stakeholder Forum - 21 November 2019
Under the title " Racing towards a clean hydrogen economy", the  will bring together the European Fuel Cell and Hydrogen community and facilitate an open discussion on the impact, achievements and strategic direction of the FCH JU programme, as well as on the latest developments in the sector. This year’s event , "Racing towards a clean hydrogen economy" will include panel discussions around the following themes:
FCH JU: making an impact by accelerating innovation and securing competitiveness
Market activation and synergies
Growth and Jobs: making the most out of hydrogen’s potential
Hydrogen at international scale
The conference will enjoy the participation of high-level representatives of the European Commission, national governments, European industry leaders and international organisations.
FCH JU Awards 2019 - 20 November 2019 (evening) 
The second edition of the FCH JU Awards will take place on 20 November 2019 at the Brussels Museum of Fine Arts. Our newest projects will compete in two categories: the best success story and the best project innovation. You will be able to vote for the best success story and the best project innovation as of 28/10/2019. to the PRD / SF conference, to join us at the Awards ceremony. Stay tuned, as we will provide more information about the awards in the coming days. 
Register now and get more information on the .
We are looking forward to seeing you at our events! 
