OPENING OF HYDROGEN REFUELLING STATION AT LONDON’S GATWICK AIRPORT 
ITM Power opened today, 25 October 2019, its eighth UK public access hydrogen refuelling station (HRS) located at the Shell services, Gatwick Airport on the M23 corridor south of London. 
The new HRS is the second of two stations in the UK to be deployed as part of the pan European H2ME2 project,  funded by the Fuel Cell and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking (FCH JU) and the Office of Low Emission Vehicles (OLEV). It uses electricity via a renewable energy contract and water to generate hydrogen on-site with no need for deliveries. 
Bart Biebuyck, Executive Director of the FCH JU said: “It is always with pride that we see how FCH JU support helps to build up the necessary hydrogen infrastructure for the prompt mass deployment of fuel cell vehicles." 
"We are fully committed to ensure that Europe is at the forefront of fuel cells and hydrogen technologies." 
"We have already supported over 50 hydrogen refuelling stations through our H2ME programme and, with initiatives like the European HRS Availability System, we aim to ensure that drivers soon can choose hydrogen-based, clean means of transport throughout the continent – and have reliable information to do so. This new hydrogen refuelling station, located in a strategic transport hub like Gatwick, where synergies with other transport modes can be reached, marks a big step forward towards a cleaner transport sector.”
Gatwick Airport is a major international airport south of Central London. It is the second-busiest airport by total passenger traffic in the UK, after Heathrow Airport and is the ninth busiest airport in Europe.
Tim Norwood, Corporate Affairs, Planning and Sustainability Director, Gatwick Airport, said: “Gatwick Airport is delighted to host a hydrogen refuelling station provided by ITM Power, to encourage the further take-up of clean emission transport for visitors to the airport and local fleet operators. We recognise the value of hydrogen as a renewable clean fuel that can contribute towards our decarbonisation and air quality objectives, and we look forward to its expanding role in transport and energy.“ 
Dr Graham Cooley, CEO of ITM Power, said, “Gatwick Airport is an important new hydrogen refuelling station. Siting this station at the UK’s second largest airport and supporting the roll out of FCEVs on the M23 heading south from the M25 is an important development for the expanding network in the UK.”
For further information, please visit 
