Pressing need to work together to tackle widespread hatred against Muslims
Rights areas:
©Adobestock/oneinchpunch 
Following the terror attacks at two mosques in Christchurch on 15 March, the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights calls for joint efforts to tackle the hatred Muslims face in their daily lives.
Publication


“I am concerned that hatred towards Muslims is a global phenomenon including here in the European Union,” said FRA Director Michael O’Flaherty in his . “Hatred against Muslims is our problem, it is a problem of our societies and our communities. Let us all work together to build the Europe where, in all of our diversity, we can live in peace and without fear.” 
The agency’s surveys and online , as well as its work with Muslim communities and Islamic leaders all point to worrying levels of hatred against Muslims across EU Member States. 
Take FRA’s . It provides a snapshot of their everyday experiences:
1 in 4 Muslim respondents were harassed, often repeatedly;
in addition, Muslim women who publicly wore a headscarf or niqab were harassed more often than those who did not;
1 in 3 were discriminated against; often, this was because of their name.
These findings reveal widespread recurring discrimination and hatred towards Muslims, as they go about their everyday life.
But the survey also points to greater trust among Muslims in democratic institutions than the general public. Not only that, 3 out of 4 feel strongly attached to their country of residence.
This underlines the crucial need to engage and work with Muslim communities to identify how best to keep them safe. It is also a duty of the State to protect people.
We must also acknowledge that hatred towards Muslims is not just their problem. It is a societal problem that affects us all.
At the same time, we must recognise that words of intolerance can stoke the fires of hate with tragic consequences, as we have recently seen.
Finally, to truly understand and effectively tackle hate crime Europe must get much better at reporting, recording, investigating and prosecuting incidents of hate crime. And this applies all across Europe.
