Shift2Rail’s participation to WCRR 2019 in Tokyo
July 22, 2019
Category: , 
The World Congress on Rail Research in Tokyo from 28 October – 1 November, will bring together more than 1000 visitors and stakeholders on rail Research & Innovation from all over the world, including manufacturers, network managers, operators, as well as research institutions and universities.
Shift2Rail will use this platform to present its latest research results to a global audience, and concretely illustrate how it is contributing to delivering the railway system of the future.
Shift2Rail’s Executive Director, Carlo Borghini, will be speaking in a panel focusing on R&D for Future Railways on the 31 October from 10.20-11.40. Moreover, the papers of 16 Shift2Rail projects have been accepted to the conference, and will either be presented in oral sessions or interactive poster presentations. They cover almost all of Shift2Rail’s Innovation Programmes. More Shift2Rail projects have sent their abstracts and are currently being evaluated.
Shift2Rail is a Platinum sponsor of the event and will have a stand in the exhibition area to showcase innovative rail solutions. Patricia Flor, Ambassador of the European Union to Japan, has been invited to officially open the Shift2Rail stand on Monday 28 October. The stand will present a selection of Shift2Rail innovations emanating from projects undertaken by our members and other stakeholders, all with a focus on the promising future of a sustainable railway system. Ensuring sustainability means working on solutions to fill the empty tracks. Achieving this will lead to a reduction in lifecycle costs, and an increase in capacity and punctuality – the ingredients to fuel Shift2Rail’s vision of bringing about the most sustainable, cost-efficient, high-performing and competitive customer-centred transport mode for Europe.
We are looking forward to hosting Shift2Rail project results on our stand at WCRR in Tokyo. Do you have something to show? Get in touch by writing to .


