4TH COPERNICUS SEA USER WORKSHOP
On the 30th of October, in the charming setting of Sorrento, the Head of the Italian Copernicus Committee delegation, Dr. Federico Cinquepalmi and the SatCen Deputy Director, Giuseppe D´Amico, welcomed all the participants to the 4th Copernicus SEA User Workshop. It was a two-day event for Public Users and stakeholders in EU Member States, the Copernicus user community and EU Institution/Agencies aimed at:
providing an insight and update on the Copernicus SEA Service,
exchanging views and assess Users’ experience with the service delivered so far,
assisting and provide training support to Users in operational aspects of the SEA Service,
collecting recommendations for service evolution.
The first day was dedicated to the presentation of the achievements of the Service, the stakeholders’ position on the SEA Service and the testimonies from Users on the use of the Service.
The second day was dedicated to demonstrations/training session delivered in 5 languages: English, German, Italian, French, Spanish. Participants were asked to contribute filling an online feedback form, which represents the first step of a fitness for purpose exercise to be conducted together with Commission in order to assess service suitability and to establish priorities for Copernicus Services.
As introduced by Giuseppe D´Amico in his initial speech, the Global Strategy for the EU Foreign and Security Policy, drafted in 2016, created the basis for an integrated approach to a Common Security and Defence Policy.
A common environment where the MSs and the EU work together coordinating soft and hard power (capabilities and resources) towards a more peaceful, secure and prosperous Europe. In this frame, the SatCen and the Commission are contributing to, and can be considered precursors of, this integrated approach.
The creation of the SEA Service, the Commission and the SatCen have been able to provide, operationally, geospatial intelligence services to EU External Action actors, including CSDP mission and operations, EU delegations, MSs (including Defence), EEAS, Commission Services and the United Nations.
Giuseppe D’Amico concluding remarks acknowledged the commitment and involvement of all the participants who are contributing to the success of SEA, encouraging them to continue the dialogue, express their needs and show their interest in the Service.
