SRB announces the appointment of new Board Member Sebastiano Laviola 
The Single Resolution Board (SRB) announces the appointment of Mr Sebastiano Laviola as Member of the Board and Director of Resolution Strategy and Cooperation. He will take up his duties on 1 May, 2019.
Mr Laviola, an Italian national, is a Central Director of Banca d’Italia, where he has served since 1986. He has spent most of his career in the Banking and Financial Supervision Department, dealing with analytical issues and coordinating policy on international regulation. He has been a continuous member of and chaired international supervisory committees and working groups. In 2012, Mr Laviola was seconded to the Permanent Representation of Italy to the EU in Brussels as Financial Services Attaché, where he negotiated financial services and Banking Union legislation.
In line with , which set up the SRB, the Commission in consultation with the SRB established a shortlist for the function of Member of the Board and Director of Resolution Strategy and Cooperation. The Commission proposed Mr Laviola as a candidate to the European Parliament. After the European Parliament gave its approval to the Commission's proposal on 14 March 2019, the Council, acting by qualified majority, adopted the appointment of Mr Laviola on 8 April 2019. He was selected through a stringent recruitment process.
He will replace Mr Mauro Grande who announced his resignation in July 2018.
“Mr Laviola has a wealth of experience in banking regulation and policy, which will be a real asset to the SRB. The Vice-Chair, Board Members and I look forward to welcoming him and working closely with him. His knowledge will help us continue in our mission to foster bank resolvability, contribute to financial stability and protect European taxpayers.
“I would also like to thank Mauro Grande for his dedication and hard work since he joined the SRB in 2015. We wish him every success for the future.”
Elke König, Chair of the Single Resolution Board.
“I am very pleased to be joining the SRB in the next weeks. In the light of my previous experience in banking and financial regulation and in the negotiation of the legislation on Banking Union, I am committed to making a contribution to improving bank resolvability.”
Sebastiano Laviola, newly appointed Member of the Board.
